# Fertilizer

<!-- source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fertilizer -->

Fertilizer
A fertilizer or fertiliser is any material of natural or synthetic origin that is applied to soil or to plant tissues to supply plant nutrients. Fertilizers may be distinct from liming materials or other non-nutrient soil amendments. Many sources of fertilizer exist, both natural and industrially produced.[1] For most modern agricultural practices, fertilization focuses on three main macronutrients: nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K) with occasional addition of supplements like rock flour for micronutrients. Farmers apply these fertilizers in a variety of ways: through dry or pelletized or liquid application processes, using large agricultural equipment, or hand-tool methods.
Historically, fertilization came from natural or organic sources: compost, animal manure, human manure, harvested minerals, crop rotations, and byproducts of human-nature industries (e.g. fish processing waste, or bloodmeal from animal slaughter).[2] However, starting in the 19th century, after innovations in plant nutrition following Justus von Liebig's discoveries, an agricultural industry developed around synthetically created agrochemical fertilizers.[3] This transition was important in transforming the global food system towards larger-scale industrial agriculture with large crop yields in monocultures.[4]
The invention of Haber process for producing ammonia for nitrogen in the 20th century combined with amplified chemical production capacity created during World War II led to a boom in using nitrogen fertilizers.[5] In the latter half of the 20th century, increased use of nitrogen fertilizers (800% increase between 1961 and 2019) has been a crucial component of the increased productivity of conventional food systems as part of the so-called "Green Revolution".[6]
Fertilizers, especially when applied excessively, can have environmental consequences such as water pollution[7] and eutrophication[8] due to nutrient runoff.[9] Additionally, the chemical process for creating the fertilizers results in byproducts, including carbon and other emissions.[10] In some cases contamination and pollution of soil result by accumulation of heavy metals contained in some fertilizers collected through mining.[11] Sustainable agricultural practices, such as reduced tillage and planting buffer strips, can minimize these adverse environmental effects.[12]
History
[edit]Management of soil fertility has preoccupied farmers since the beginning of agriculture. Middle Eastern,[16] Chinese,[17] Mesoamerican,[18] and cultures of the Central Andes[19] were all early adopters of agriculture. This is thought to have led to their cultures growing faster in population which allowed an exportation of culture to neighboring hunter-gatherer groups.[20] Fertilizer use along with agriculture allowed some of these early societies a critical advantage over their neighbors, leading them to become dominant cultures in their respective regions.[21][22] Egyptians, Romans, Babylonians, and early Germans are all recorded as using minerals or manure to enhance the productivity of their farms.[1] The scientific research of plant nutrition started well before the work of German chemist Justus von Liebig although his name is most mentioned as the "father of the fertilizer industry".[23] Nicolas Théodore de Saussure and scientific colleagues at the time were quick to disprove the simplifications of von Liebig.[24] Prominent scientists whom von Liebig drew were Carl Ludwig Sprenger and Hermann Hellriegel.[25] In this field, a 'knowledge erosion' took place,[26] partly driven by an intermingling of economics and research.[27] John Bennet Lawes, an English entrepreneur, began experimenting on the effects of various manures on plants growing in pots in 1837, and a year or two later the experiments were extended to crops in the field. One immediate consequence was that in 1842 he patented a manure formed by treating phosphates with sulfuric acid, and thus was the first to create the artificial manure industry. In the succeeding year, he enlisted the services of Joseph Henry Gilbert; together they performed crop experiments at the Institute of Arable Crops Research.[28]
The Birkeland–Eyde process was one of the competing industrial processes at the beginning of nitrogen-based fertilizer production.[29] This process was used to fix atmospheric nitrogen (N2) into nitric acid (HNO3), one of several chemical processes called nitrogen fixation. The resultant nitric acid was then used as a source of nitrate (NO3−). A factory based on the process was built in Rjukan and Notodden in Norway and large hydroelectric power facilities were built.[30]
The 1910s and 1920s witnessed the rise of the Haber process and the Ostwald process. The Haber process produces ammonia (NH3) from methane (CH4) (natural gas) and molecular nitrogen (N2) from the air. The ammonia from the Haber process is then partially converted into nitric acid (HNO3) in the Ostwald process.[31] It is estimated that a third of annual global food production uses ammonia from the Haber–Bosch process and that this supports nearly half the world's population.[32][33] After World War II, nitrogen production plants that had ramped up for wartime bomb manufacturing were pivoted towards agricultural uses.[34] The use of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers has increased steadily over the last 50 years of the 20th century, rising almost 20-fold to a rate of 100 million tonnes of nitrogen per year in 2003.[35]
The development of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers has significantly supported global population growth. It has been estimated that almost half the people on the Earth are currently fed due to synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use.[36] The use of phosphate fertilizers has also increased from 9 million tonnes per year in 1960 to 40 million tonnes per year in 2000, but future phosphorus fertilizer availability is now a critical issue.[37]
Agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2021 was 195 million tonnes of nutrients, of which 56% was nitrogen.[38] Asia represented 53% of the world's total agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2021, followed by the Americas (29%), Europe (12%), Africa (4%) and Oceania (2%). This ranking of the regions is the same for all nutrients. The main users of inorganic fertilizers are, in descending order, China, India, Brazil, and the United States of America (see Table 15), with China the largest user of each nutrient.[38] Agricultural use of inorganic fertilizers in 2023 was 190 million tonnes of nutrients, of which 112 million tonnes (58%) was nitrogen.[39]
A maize crop yielding 6–9 tonnes of grain per hectare (2.5 acres) requires 31–50 kilograms (68–110 lb) of phosphate fertilizer to be applied; soybean crops require about half, 20–25 kg per hectare.[40] Yara International is the world's largest producer of nitrogen-based fertilizers.[41]
Mechanism
[edit]Fertilizers enhance the growth of plants. This goal is met in two ways, the traditional one being additives that provide nutrients. The second mode by which some fertilizers act is to enhance the effectiveness of the soil by modifying its water-holding capacity and aeration.[42] This article, like many on fertilizers, emphasizes the nutritional aspect.
Fertilizers typically provide, in varying proportions:[43]
- Three main macronutrients (NPK):
- Micronutrients: copper (Cu), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo), zinc (Zn), and boron (B).[47] Of occasional significance are silicon (Si), cobalt (Co), and vanadium (V).[48]
Although calcium uptake by plant roots has long-time been considered as luxury consumption,[49] it is now considered as an essential element for its various roles in the maintenance of the integrity of plant cell walls and cell membranes.[50] Liming has also a decisive and positive influence on crop yields by couteracting soil acidification,[51] a side-effect of plant growth[52] and nutrient export by crops,[53] improving soil structure, and thus soil aeration,[54] and increasing soil biological activity, thereby soil fertility, in particular through increased nitrification.[55]
The nutrients required for healthy plant life are classified according to the elements, but the elements are not used as fertilizers. Instead, compounds containing these elements are the basis of fertilizers. Macro-nutrients are present in plant tissue in quantities from 0.15% to 6.0% on a dry matter (DM) (0% moisture) basis but they are sometimes consumed in larger quantities than required (luxury consumption), in particular when fertilizers are used in excess of plant requirements (overfertilization).[56] Plants are made up of four main elements: hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. Carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen are widely available respectively in carbon dioxide and in water. Although nitrogen makes up most of the atmosphere, it is in a form that is unavailable to plants. Nitrogen is the most important fertilizer since nitrogen is present in proteins (amide bonds between amino acids), DNA (puric and pyrimidic[check spelling] bases), and other components (e.g., tetrapyrrolic heme in chlorophyll). It is common tenet that nitrogen is absent from the parent rock and thus cannot be obtained from mineral weathering, although recent studies point to the equal importance of the atmosphere and bedrock as nitrogen sources.[57] Nitrogen is made available to plants through weathering of nitrogen-containing parent rocks[58] and nitrogen fixation. Only some free-living (e.g. Clostridium) and symbiotic bacteria living in root systems of host plants (notably legumes) can fix atmospheric nitrogen (N2) by converting it to ammonia (NH3) and amino acids which are available to plants.[59][60] Phosphate (PO3−4) is required for the production of DNA (genetic code) and ATP, the main energy carrier in cells, as well as certain lipids (phospholipids, the main components of the lipidic double layer of the cell membranes).[61]
Microbiological considerations
[edit]Two sets of enzymatic reactions are highly relevant to the efficiency of nitrogen-based fertilizers.
- Urease
The first is the hydrolysis (reaction with water) of urea (CO(NH2)2). Many soil bacteria possess the enzyme urease, which catalyzes the conversion of urea to ammonium ion (NH+4) and bicarbonate ion (HCO−3).[62]
- Ammonia oxidation
Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB), such as species of Nitrosomonas, oxidize ammonia (NH3) to nitrite (NO−2), a process termed nitrification.[63] Nitrite-oxidizing bacteria, especially Nitrobacter, oxidize nitrite (NO−2) to nitrate (NO−3), which is extremely soluble and mobile, being leached easily to groundwater then to rivers then to the sea, and is a major cause of eutrophication[64] and algal blooms in rivers, lakes and sea shores.[65]
Classification
[edit]Fertilizers are classified in several ways. They are classified according to whether they provide a single nutrient (e.g., K, P, or N), in which case they are classified as straight fertilizers. Multinutrient fertilizers (or complex fertilizers) provide two or more nutrients, for example, N and P combined. Fertilizers are also sometimes classified as inorganic (the topic of most of this article) versus organic. Inorganic fertilizers exclude carbon-containing materials except urea. Organic fertilizers are usually (recycled) plant- or animal-derived matter (e.g. compost, manure, respectively). Inorganic are sometimes called synthetic fertilizers since various chemical treatments are required for their manufacture.[66]
Single nutrient ("straight") fertilizers
[edit]The main nitrogen-based straight fertilizer is ammonia (NH3), ionized in solution as ammonium (NH4+), applied in the form of salts or derivatives, including:
- Ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) with 34-35% nitrogen is widely used.
- Urea (CO(NH2)2), with 45-46% nitrogen, another popular source of nitrogen, having the advantage that it is solid and non-explosive, unlike ammonia and ammonium nitrate.
- Calcium ammonium nitrate Is a blend of 20-30% limestone CaCO3 or dolomite CaMg(CO3)2 and 70-80% ammonium nitrate with 24-28% nitrogen.
- Calcium nitrate with 15.5% nitrogen and 19% calcium, reportedly holding a small share of the nitrogen fertilizer market (4% in 2007).[67]
The main straight phosphate fertilizers are the superphosphates:
- Single superphosphate (SSP) consisting of 14–18% P2O5, again in the form of Ca(H2PO4)2, but also phosphogypsum (CaSO4 · 2 H2O).
- Triple superphosphate (TSP) typically consists of 44–48% of P2O5 and no gypsum.
A mixture of single superphosphate and triple superphosphate is called double superphosphate. More than 90% of a typical superphosphate fertilizer is water-soluble.
The main potassium-based straight fertilizer is muriate of potash (MOP, 95–99% KCl). It is typically available as 0-0-60 or 0-0-62 fertilizer.
Multinutrient fertilizers
[edit]These fertilizers are common. They consist of two or more nutrient components.
- Binary (NP, NK, PK) fertilizers
Major two-component fertilizers provide both nitrogen and phosphorus to the plants. These are called NP fertilizers. The main NP fertilizers are
- monoammonium phosphate (MAP) NH4H2PO4. With 11% nitrogen and 48% P2O5.
- diammonium phosphate (DAP). (NH4)2HPO4. With 18% nitrogen and 46% P2O5
About 85% of MAP and DAP fertilizers are soluble in water.
- NPK fertilizers
NPK fertilizers are three-component fertilizers providing nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. There exist two types of NPK fertilizers: compound and blends. Compound NPK fertilizers contain chemically bound ingredients, while blended NPK fertilizers are physical mixtures of single nutrient components.
NPK rating is a rating system describing the amount of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in a fertilizer. NPK ratings consist of three numbers separated by dashes (e.g., 10-10-10 or 16–4–8) describing the chemical content of fertilizers.[68] The first number represents the percentage of nitrogen in the product; the second number, P2O5; the third, K2O. Fertilizers do not actually contain P2O5 or K2O, but the system is a conventional shorthand for the amount of phosphorus (P) or potassium (K) in a fertilizer. A 50-pound (23 kg) bag of fertilizer labeled 16-4-8 contains 8 lb (3.6 kg) of nitrogen (16% of the 50 pounds), an amount of phosphorus equivalent to that in 2 pounds of P2O5 (4% of 50 pounds), and 4 pounds of K2O (8% of 50 pounds). Most fertilizers are labeled according to this N-P-K convention, although Australian convention, following an N-P-K-S system, adds a fourth number for sulfur, and uses elemental values for all values including P and K.[69]
Micronutrients
[edit]Micronutrients are consumed in smaller quantities and are present in plant tissue on the order of parts-per-million (ppm), ranging from 0.15 to 400 ppm or less than 0.04% dry matter.[70][71] These elements are often required as co-enzymes for enzymes essential to the plant's metabolism. Because these elements enable catalysts (enzymes), their impact far exceeds their concentration. Typical micronutrients are boron, zinc, molybdenum, iron, and manganese.[43] These elements are provided as water-soluble salts. Iron presents special problems because it converts from soluble (ferrous) to insoluble bio-unavailable (ferric) compounds at moderate soil pH and phosphate concentrations.[72] For this reason, iron is often administered as a chelate complex, e.g., the EDTA or EDDHA derivatives. The micronutrient needs depend on the plant and the environment. For example, sugar beets appear to require boron, and legumes require cobalt,[1] while environmental conditions such as heat or drought make boron less available for plants, causing boron deficiency.[73]
Production
[edit]The production of synthetic, or inorganic, fertilizers require prepared chemicals,[74] whereas organic fertilizers are derived from the biological processing of plant and animal remains or excreta (e.g. urine, feces).[75]
Nitrogen fertilizers
[edit]Nitrogen fertilizers are made from ammonia (NH3) produced by the Haber–Bosch process.[67] In this energy-intensive process, natural gas (CH4) usually supplies the hydrogen, and the nitrogen (N2) is derived from the air. This ammonia is used as a feedstock for all other nitrogen fertilizers, such as anhydrous ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) and urea (CO(NH2)2).
Deposits of sodium nitrate (NaNO3) (Chilean saltpeter) are also found in the Atacama Desert in Chile and were one of the original (1830) nitrogen-rich fertilizers used.[76] It is still mined for fertilizer use.[77] Nitrates are also produced from ammonia by the Ostwald process.
Phosphate fertilizers
[edit]Phosphate fertilizers are obtained by extraction from phosphate rock, which contains two principal phosphorus-containing minerals, fluorapatite Ca5(PO4)3F (CFA) and hydroxyapatite Ca5(PO4)3OH. Billions of kg of phosphate rock are mined annually, but the size and quality of the remaining ore is decreasing.[37] These minerals are converted into water-soluble phosphate salts by treatment with acids.[78] The large production of sulfuric acid is primarily motivated by this application.[79] In the nitrophosphate process or Odda process (invented in 1927), phosphate rock with up to a 20% phosphorus (P) content is dissolved with nitric acid (HNO3) to produce a mixture of phosphoric acid (H3PO4) and calcium nitrate (Ca(NO3)2). This mixture can be combined with a potassium fertilizer to produce a compound fertilizer with the three macronutrients N, P and K in easily dissolved form.[80]
Potassium fertilizers
[edit]Potash is a mixture of potassium minerals used to make potassium (chemical symbol: K) fertilizers. Potash is soluble in water, so the main effort in producing this nutrient from the ore involves some purification steps, e.g., to remove sodium chloride (NaCl) (common salt).[81] Sometimes potash is referred to as K2O, as a matter of convenience to those describing the potassium content. In fact, potash fertilizers are usually potassium chloride, potassium sulfate, potassium carbonate, or potassium nitrate.[82]
NPK fertilizers
[edit]There are three major routes for manufacturing NPK fertilizers (named for their main ingredients: nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K)):
- Bulk blending. The individual fertilizers are combined in the desired nutrient ratio.
- The wet process is based on chemical reactions between liquid raw materials phosphoric acid, sulfuric acid, ammonia) and solid raw materials (such as potassium chloride).
- The nitrophosphate process.
Step 1. Nitrophosphates are made by acidiculating phosphate rock with nitric acid.
- Nitric acid + Phosphate rock → Phosphoric acid + Calcium sulphate + hexafluorosilicic acid.
- Ca5F(PO4)3 + 10 HNO3 →6 H3PO4 + 5 Ca(NO3)2 + HF
- 6 HF + SiO2 →H2SiF6 + 2 H2O
 
Step 2. Removal of Calcium Nitrate. It is important to remove the calcium nitrate because calcium nitrate is extremely hygroscopic.
- Method 1.(Odda process) Calcium nitrate crystals are removed by centrifugation.
- Method 2. Sulfonitric Process Ca(NO3)2 + H2SO4 + 2NH3 → CaSO4 + 2NH4NO3
- Method 3.Phosphonitric Process Ca(NO3)2 + H3PO4 + 2NH3 → CaHPO4 + 2NH4NO3
- Method 4.Carbonitric Process Ca(NO3)2 + CO2 + H2O + 2NH3 → CaCO3 + 2NH4NO3
 
Organic fertilizers
[edit]Organic fertilizers can describe those fertilizers with a biological origin, i.e. derived from living or formerly living materials. Organic fertilizers can also describe commercially available and frequently packaged products that strive to follow the expectations and restrictions adopted by organic farming and environmentally friendly gardening, i.e. related systems of food and plant production that significantly limit or strictly avoid the use of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides. The organic fertilizer products typically contain both some organic materials as well as acceptable additives such as nutritive rock powders, ground seashells (crab, oyster, etc.), other prepared products such as seed meal or kelp, and cultivated microorgan
