# Onion

<!-- source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onion -->

Onion
The onion (Allium cepa L., from Latin cepa), also known as the bulb onion or common onion, is a vegetable that is the most widely cultivated species of the genus Allium. The shallot is a botanical variety of the onion which was classified as a separate species until 2011. The onion's close relatives include garlic, scallion, leek, and chives.
The genus contains several other species cultivated for food, such as the Japanese bunching onion Allium fistulosum, the tree onion Allium × proliferum, and the Canada onion Allium canadense. The name wild onion is applied to a number of Allium species, but A. cepa is exclusively known from cultivation. Its ancestral wild original form is not known, although escapes from cultivation have become established in some regions. The onion is most frequently a biennial or a perennial plant, but is usually treated as an annual and harvested in its first growing season.
The onion plant has a fan of hollow, bluish-green leaves, and its bulb at the base of the plant begins to swell when a certain day-length is reached. The bulbs are composed of shortened, compressed, underground stems surrounded by fleshy modified scale (leaves) that envelop a central bud at the tip of the stem. In the autumn (or in spring, in the case of overwintering onions), the foliage dies down and the outer layers of the bulb become more dry, and brittle. The crop is harvested and dried and the onions are ready for use or storage. The crop is prone to attack by a number of pests and diseases, particularly the onion fly, the onion eelworm, and various fungi which can cause rotting. Some varieties of A. cepa, such as shallots and potato onions, produce multiple bulbs.
Onions are cultivated and used around the world. As a food item, they are often served raw as a vegetable or part of a prepared savoury dish, but can be eaten cooked or used to make pickles or chutneys. They are pungent when chopped and contain certain chemical substances which may irritate the eyes.
Taxonomy and etymology
The onion plant (Allium cepa), also known as the bulb onion[2] or common onion,[3] is the most widely cultivated species of the genus Allium.[4][5] It was first officially described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1753 work Species Plantarum.[6] Synonyms during its taxonomic history are:[7][8]
- Allium cepa var. aggregatum – G. Don
- Allium cepa var. bulbiferum – Regel
- Allium cepa var. cepa – Linnaeus
- Allium cepa var. multiplicans – L.H. Bailey
- Allium cepa var. proliferum – (Moench) Regel
- Allium cepa var. solaninum – Alef
- Allium cepa var. viviparum – (Metz) Mansf.[7][8]
A. cepa is known exclusively from cultivation,[9] but related wild species occur in Central Asia and Iran. The most closely related include A. vavilovii from Turkmenistan and A. asarense from Iran.[10][11] The genus Allium contains other species variously called onions and cultivated for food, such as the Japanese bunching onion (A. fistulosum), Egyptian onion (A. × proliferum), and Canada onion (A. canadense).[3] The vast majority of cultivars of A. cepa belong to the common onion group (A. cepa var. cepa) and are usually referred to simply as onions. The Aggregatum Group of cultivars (A. cepa var. aggregatum) includes both shallots,[12] formerly classed as a separate species,[13][14] and potato onions.[12] Related species include garlic, leek, and chives.[15]
Cepa is commonly accepted as Latin for "onion"; the generic name Allium is the classical Latin name for garlic.[16] It has an affinity with Spanish: cebolla, Italian: cipolla, Polish: cebula, and the German Zwiebel (this last altered by folk etymology). The English word "chive" is from the Old French chive, in turn from cepa.[17]
Description
The onion is a biennial plant but is usually grown as an annual. Modern varieties typically grow to a height of 15 to 45 cm (6 to 18 in). The leaves are yellowish- to bluish green and grow alternately in a flattened, fan-shaped swathe. They are fleshy, hollow, and cylindrical, with one flattened side. They are at their broadest about a quarter of the way up, beyond which they taper to blunt tips. The base of each leaf is a flattened, usually white sheath that grows out of the basal plate of a bulb. From the underside of the plate, a bundle of fibrous roots extends for a short way into the soil. As the onion matures, food reserves accumulate in the leaf bases, and the bulb of the onion swells.[18]
In the autumn, the leaves die back, and the outer scales of the bulb become dry and brittle, so the crop is normally harvested. If left in the soil over winter, the growing point in the middle of the bulb begins to develop in the spring. New leaves appear, and a long, stout, hollow stem expands, topped by a bract protecting a developing inflorescence. The inflorescence takes the form of a rounded umbel of white flowers with parts in sixes. The seeds are glossy black and triangular in cross-section.[18] The average pH of an onion is around 5.5.[19]
- 
			
			Roots, leaves and developing bulb
- 
			
			Inflorescence with flower buds
- 
			
			Seeds
History
Onions have been variously described as having originated in Iran, western Pakistan and Central Asia.[20][21][22][23] Humans have grown and selectively bred onions in cultivation for at least 7,000 years.[24] The geographic origin of the onion is uncertain; ancient records of onion use span both eastern and western Asia.[20][22] Domestication likely took place in West or Central Asia.[12][21] The onion species Allium fistulosum (spring onion, bunching onion) and Allium tuberosum (Chinese leek) were domesticated in China around 6000 BC alongside other vegetables, grains, and fruits.[25]
Ancient Mesopotamian recipes that used onions and other Allium species were recorded in cuneiform script on the Yale culinary tablets. The tablets, dating from around 2000 BC, are the oldest known recipes in the world.[26] The Assyriologist and "gourmet cook"[26] Jean Bottero stated this was "a cuisine of striking richness, refinement, sophistication and artistry".[26] The onion is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible; evidence of onions in ancient Israel comes from Chalcolithic Nahal Mishmar and from Bronze Age Jericho.[27]
Ancient Egyptians revered the onion bulb, viewing its spherical shape and concentric rings as symbols of eternal life.[21] Onions were used in Egyptian burials, as evidenced by onion traces found in the eye sockets of Ramesses IV.[28] Pliny the Elder of the first century AD wrote about the use of onions and cabbage in Pompeii. He documented Roman beliefs about the onion's ability to improve ocular ailments, aid in sleep, and heal everything from oral sores and toothaches to dog bites, lumbago, and even dysentery. Archaeologists unearthing Pompeii long after its 79 AD volcanic burial have found gardens resembling those in Pliny's detailed narratives. According to texts collected in the fifth/sixth century AD under the authorial aegis of "Apicius" (said to have been a gourmet), onions were used in many Roman recipes.[21]
In the Age of Discovery, onions were taken to North America by the first European settlers in the Columbian exchange. They found close relatives such as Allium tricoccum readily available and widely used in Native American gastronomy.[20] According to diaries kept by early English colonists, the bulb onion was one of the first crops planted in North America by the Pilgrim fathers.[21] Between 1883 and 1939, inventors in the United States patented 97 inventions meant to make onion-growing more efficient through automation.[29]
Uses
Culinary
Onions come in three colour varieties:
- Yellow or brown onions are sweet, with many cultivars bred specifically to accentuate this sweetness, such as Vidalia, Walla Walla, Cévennes, and Bermuda.[30] Yellow onions turn a rich, dark brown when caramelised and are used to add a sweet flavour to various dishes, such as French onion soup.[31]
- Red or purple onions, known for their sharp pungent flavour, are commonly cooked in many cuisines, and used raw and in grilling.[31]
- White onions are mild in flavour; they have a golden colour when cooked and a particularly sweet flavour when sautéed.[31][21]
Onions are commonly chopped and used as an ingredient in various hearty warm dishes, and may be used as a main ingredient in their own right, for example in French onion soup, creamed onions, and onion chutney. They are versatile and can be baked, boiled, braised, grilled, fried, roasted, sautéed, or eaten raw in salads.[32] Onions are a major ingredient of some curries; the Persian-style dopiaza's name means "double onion", and it is used both in the dish's sour curry sauce and as a garnish.[33] Onion powder is a seasoning made from finely ground, dehydrated onions; it is often included in seasoned salt and spice mixes.[34]
While the large, mature onion bulb is what is most often eaten, onions can be eaten at immature stages. Young plants may be harvested before bulbing occurs and used whole as spring onions or scallions. When an onion is harvested after bulbing has begun, but the onion is not yet mature, the plants are sometimes referred to as "summer" onions. Onions may be bred and grown to mature at smaller sizes, known as pearl, boiler, or pickler onions; these are not true pearl onions which are a different species.[35] Pearl and boiler onions may be cooked as a vegetable rather than as an ingredient, while pickler onions are often preserved in vinegar as a long-lasting relish.[36] Onions pickled in vinegar are eaten as a side serving with traditional pub food such as a ploughman's lunch.[37]
Other uses
Onions have particularly large cells that are easy to observe under low magnification. Forming a single layer of cells, the bulb epidermis is easy to separate for educational, experimental, and breeding purposes.[38][39] Onions are therefore commonly used in science education to teach the use of a microscope for observing cell structure.[40] Onion skins can be boiled to make an orange-brown dye.[41]
Composition
Nutrients
Most onion cultivars are about 89% water, 9% carbohydrates (including 4% sugar and 2% dietary fibre), 1% protein, and negligible fat (table). Onions contain low amounts of essential nutrients and have an energy value of 166 kJ (40 kilocalories) in a 100 g (3.5 oz) amount. Onions contribute savoury flavour to dishes without contributing significant caloric content.[21]
Phytochemicals
Onion varieties vary widely in phytochemical content, particularly for polyphenols, with shallots having the highest level, six times the amount found in Vidalia onions. Yellow onions have the highest total flavonoid content, an amount 11 times higher than in white onions. Red onions have considerable content of anthocyanin pigments, with at least 25 different compounds identified representing 10% of total flavonoid content.[44] Like garlic,[45] onions can show an additional colour – pink-red – after cutting, an effect caused by reactions of amino acids with sulfur compounds.[46] Onion polyphenols are under basic research to determine their possible biological properties in humans.[44][47]
Adverse effects and toxicity
Some people suffer from allergic reactions after handling onions.[48] Symptoms can include contact dermatitis, intense itching, rhinoconjunctivitis, blurred vision, bronchial asthma, sweating, and anaphylaxis. Allergic reactions may not occur when eating cooked onions, possibly due to the denaturing of the proteins from cooking.[49]
Eye irritation
Freshly cut onions can produce a stinging sensation in the eyes of people nearby and often uncontrollable tears. This is caused by the release of a volatile liquid, syn-propanethial-S-oxide and its aerosol, which stimulates nerves in the eye. This gas is produced by a chain of reactions which serve as a defence mechanism: chopping an onion causes damage to cells which releases enzymes called alliinases. These break down amino acid sulfoxides and generate sulfenic acids. A specific sulfenic acid, 1-propenesulfenic acid, is rapidly acted on by a second enzyme, the lacrimatory factor synthase (LFS), producing the syn-propanethial-S-oxide.[4] This gas diffuses through the air and soon reaches the eyes, where it activates sensory neurons. Lacrimal glands produce tears to dilute and flush out the irritant. Eye irritation can be minimised by cutting onions under running water or submerged in a basin of water.[50] Leaving the root end intact also reduces irritation as the onion base has a higher concentration of sulphur compounds than the rest of the bulb.[51]
- 
			
			Cut onions emit a chemical compound which cause the lacrimal glands in the eyes to become irritated, releasing tears.
- 
			
			Model of syn-propanethial-S-oxide, the volatile molecule that causes eye irritation
The amount of sulfenic acids and lacrimal factor released and the irritation effect differs among Allium species. In 2008, the New Zealand Institute for Crop and Food Research created "no tears" onions by genetic modification to prevent the synthesis of lachrymatory factor synthase in onions.[52] One study suggests that consumers prefer the flavour of onions with lower LFS content.[53] Since the process impedes sulfur ingestion by the plant, some find LFS− onions inferior in flavour.[54]
A method for efficiently differentiating LFS− and LFS+ onions has been developed based on mass spectrometry, with potential application in high-volume production;[55] gas chromatography is also used to measure lachrymatory factor in onions.[56][57] In early 2018, Bayer released the first crop yield of commercially available LFS-silenced onions under the name "Sunions".[58] They were the product of 30 years of cross-breeding; genetic modification was not employed.[58][59]
Guinea hen weed and honey garlic contain a similar lachrymatory factor.[60] Synthetic onion lachrymatory factor has been used in a study related to tear production,[61] and has been proposed as a nonlethal deterrent against thieves and intruders.[62][63]
Other effects
Onions are toxic to animals including dogs, cats, and guinea pigs.[64][65]
Onions can accumulate heavy metals such as cadmium and lead, particularly when cultivated in contaminated soils.[66] The European Union regulates the presence of these contaminants.[67] Several studies monitoring onion crops have reported cadmium or lead concentrations that exceed regulatory limits.[68]
Producing onions
Cultivation
Onions are best cultivated in fertile, well-drained soils. Sandy loams are good as they are low in sulphur, whereas clay-rich soils usually have high sulphur content and produce pungent bulbs. Onions require a high level of nutrients in the soil. Phosphorus is often present in sufficient quantities, but may be applied before planting because of its low level of availability in cold soils. Nitrogen and potash can be applied at regular intervals during the growing season, the last application of nitrogen being at least four weeks before harvesting.[69]
Bulbing onions are day-length sensitive; their bulbs begin growing only after the number of daylight hours has surpassed some minimal quantity. Most traditional European onions are referred to as "long-day" onions, producing bulbs only after 14 hours or more of daylight occurs. Southern European and North African varieties are often known as "intermediate-day" types, requiring only 12–13 hours of daylight to stimulate bulb formation. "Short-day" onions, which have been developed in more recent times, are planted in mild-winter areas in the autumn and form bulbs in the early spring and require only 11–12 hours of daylight to stimulate bulb formation.[70] Onions are a cool-weather crop and can be grown in USDA zones 3 to 9.[71] Hot temperatures or other stressful conditions cause them to "bolt", meaning that a flower stem begins to grow.[72]
Onions are grown from seeds or from partially grown bulbs called "sets" or starter bulbs. Onion seeds are short-lived and fresh seeds germinate more effectively when sown in shallow rows, or "drills," with each drill 12" to 18" apart.[71][73] In suitable climates, certain cultivars can be sown in late summer and autumn to overwinter in the ground and produce early crops the following year.[18]
Onion bulbs are produced by sowing seeds in a dense pattern in early summer, then harvested in the autumn when the bulbs are still small, followed by drying and storage. These bulbs are planted the following spring and grow into mature bulbs later in the growing season.[74] Certain cultivars used for growing and storing bulbs may not have as good storage characteristics as those grown directly from seed.[18]
Routine care during the growing season involves keeping the rows free of competing weeds, especially when the plants are young. The plants are shallow-rooted and do not need much water when established. Bulbing usually takes place after 12 to 18 weeks. The bulbs can be gathered when needed to eat fresh, but if stored, they are harvested after the leaves have died back naturally. In dry weather, they may be left on the surface of the soil for a few days for drying, then are placed in nets, roped into strings, or laid in layers in shallow boxes to be stored in a cool, well-ventilated place.[18]
Pests and diseases
Onions suffer from several pests and diseases. The most serious for the home gardener are likely to be the onion fly, stem and bulb eelworm, white rot, and neck rot. Diseases affecting the foliage include rust and smut, downy mildew, and white tip disease. The bulbs may be affected by splitting, white rot, and neck rot. Shanking is a condition in which the central leaves turn yellow and the inner part of the bulb collapses into an unpleasant-smelling slime. Most of these disorders are best treated by removing and burning affected plants.[75] The larvae of the onion leaf miner or leek moth (Acrolepiopsis assectella) sometimes attack the foliage and may burrow down into the bulb.[76]
The onion fly (Delia antiqua) lays eggs on the leaves and stems and on the ground close to onion, shallot, leek, and garlic plants. The fly is attracted to the crop by the smell of damaged tissue and is liable to occur after thinning. Plants grown from sets are less prone to attack. The larvae tunnel into the bulbs and the foliage wilts and turns yellow. The bulbs are disfigured and rot, especially in wet weather. Control measures may include crop rotation, the use of seed dressings, early sowing or planting, and the removal of infested plants.[77]
The onion eelworm (Ditylenchus dipsaci), a tiny parasitic soil-living nematode, causes swollen, distorted foliage. Young plants are killed and older ones produce soft bulbs. No cure is known and affected plants should be uprooted and burned. The site should not be used for growing onions again for several years and should also be avoided for growing carrots, parsnips, and beans, which are also susceptible to the eelworm.[78]
White rot of onions, leeks, and garlic is caused by the soil-borne fungus Sclerotium cepivorum. As the roots rot, the foliage turns yellow and wilts. The bases of the bulbs are attacked and become covered by a fluffy white mass of mycelia, which later produces small, globular black structures called sclerotia. These resting structures remain in the soil to reinfect a future crop. No cure for this fungal disease exists, so affected plants should be removed and destroyed and the ground used for unrelated crops in subsequent years.[79]
Neck rot is a fungal disease affecting onions in storage. It is caused by Botrytis allii, which attacks the neck and upper parts of the bulb, causing a grey mould to develop. The symptoms often first occur where the bulb has been damaged and spread down the affected scales. Large quantities of spores are produced and crust-like sclerotia may also develop. In time, a dry rot sets in and the bulb becomes a dry, mummified structure. This disease may be present throughout the growing period, but onl
